README.md, before:


WeLite
======

WeLite is a Kotlin DSL, and Statement/Cursor Wrapper, for Android SQLite 

### The goals of this library are:
  * Provide a DSL for Android SQLite that fully (eventually) encapsulates the underlying SQL
  * Clients write Kotlin - no SQL, no annotation processing
  * Support Kotlin coroutines via suspend methods and an injected coroutine dispatcher
  * Encapsulate SQLite statements, eg. insert/update/delete, for reuse and simplified binding   
  * Encapsulate Select results and provide for easy row->object conversion

## Usage

### Create Database
Create a single Database instance and then inject/locate where needed.
```kotlin
Database(
  context = androidContext(),
  fileName = "FileName",
  tables = listOf(MediaFileTable, ArtistTable, AlbumTable, ArtistAlbumTable),
  version = 1,
  migrations = emptyList(),
  openParams = OpenParams(
    enableWriteAheadLogging = true,
    enableForeignKeyConstraints = true
  )
) {
  onConfigure { configuration -> /* your code */ }
  onCreate { database -> /* your code */ }
  onOpen { database -> /* your code */  }
}
 ``` 
The table list passed to Database will be ordered based on dependencies before being created. 
```Database.tables``` returns the tables in this "dependency" order.

When constructing the Database a DatabaseLifecycle object provides for configuration on 
each step toward fully configured, created, and open. The client optionally provides a lambda to
be called at each step. The interfaces provided to these configuration lambdas are designed based
on when the Android SQLite documentation or code says various functions should be called.     
  
### Define Tables
Tables extend the Table class and define the columns/column attributes.
```kotlin
object MediaFileTable : Table() {
  val id = long("_id") { primaryKey() }
  val mediaUri = text("MediaUri") { unique() }
  val artistId = long("ArtistId") { references(ArtistTable.id) }
  val albumId = long("AlbumId") { references(AlbumTable.id) }
}

object ArtistTable : Table() {
  val id = long("_id") { primaryKey() }
  val comment = optText("comment")
  val artistName = text("ArtistName") { collateNoCase().uniqueIndex() }
}

object AlbumTable : Table() {
  val id = long("_id") { primaryKey() }
  val albumName = text("AlbumName") { collateNoCase().uniqueIndex() }
}

object ArtistAlbumTable : Table() {
  val id = long("_id") { primaryKey() }
  val artistId = long("ArtistId") { index().references(ArtistTable.id, ForeignKeyAction.CASCADE) }
  val albumId = long("AlbumId") { index().references(AlbumTable.id, ForeignKeyAction.CASCADE) }
  init {
    uniqueIndex(artistId, albumId)
  }
}
```   
### Insert Data
To insert data, or any database operation, a transaction needs to be opened. The 
Database.transaction() will execute the given lambda via a CoroutineDispatcher which defaults to 
Dispatchers.IO but may be provided by the client. 
```kotlin
db.transaction {
  // build an insert statement which contains bindable arguments
  val insertStatement = MediaFileTable.insertValues {
    it[mediaUri].bindArg()
    it[fileName].bindArg()
    it[mediaTitle].bindArg()
  }

  // use the insert statement to insert the data, which is most efficient for bulk inserting
  insertStatement.insert {
    it[0] = "file.mpg"
    it[1] = "/dir/Music/file.mpg"
    it[2] = "A Title"
  }

  // reuse statement and insert another row        
  insertStatement.insert {
    it[0] = "/dir/Music/anotherFile.mpg"
    it[1] = "anotherFile.mpg"
    it[2] = "Another Title"
  }

  // example of single insert (statement not exposed)
  MediaFileTable.insert {
    it[mediaUri] = "/dir/Music/third.mp3"
    it[fileName] = "third"
    it[mediaTitle] = "Third Title"
  }

  // single insert with bind variables
  MediaFileTable.insert({ it[0] = "/dir/Music/fourth.mp3" }) {
    it[mediaUri].bindArg()
    it[fileName] = "fourth"
    it[mediaTitle] = "Fourth Title"
  }

  // typically not necessary as the transaction will auto setSuccessful() by default if not
  // rolled back and an exception is not thrown. 
  setSuccessful()
}
```  
### Query Data
Queries are performed on a ColumnSet, such as Table, Join, Alias, or View. The DSL provides for the 
typical select (columns) where (expression) to generate QueryBuilder object on which the client 
can call orderBy, groupBy, etc. and then build or execute the Query.

For example, to get the count of rows in the MediaFileTable where the mediaTitle column has "Hits" 
somewhere in the string:
```kotlin
val count = query {
  MediaFileTable.select(fileName).where { mediaTitle like "%Hits%" }.count()
}
```  
To check if an Artist has been inserted into the ArtistTable, and if not then insert:
```kotlin
query {
  val artist = "The Beatles"
  val idArtist: Long = ArtistTable.select(ArtistTable.id)
        .where { ArtistTable.artistName eq artist }
        .sequence { it[ArtistTable.id] }
        .singleOrNull() ?: ArtistTable.insert { it[artistName] = artist }
}
```
A Select of the artist id on the ArtistTable, where artistName equals the artist in question, is 
performed and is transformed to a sequence where a single item is expected. If the result of 
singleOrNull is null, then the data is inserted.

This snippet from a unit test shows how to refer to a Table alias column via the original table 
column:
```kotlin
query {
  val personAlias = Person.alias("person_alias")
  expect(
    personAlias.select(personAlias[Person.name], personAlias[Person.cityId])
    .where { personAlias[Person.name] eq "Rick"}
    .groupBy(personAlias[Person.cityId])
    .sequence { it[personAlias[Person.name]] }
    .count()
  ).toBe(1)
}
```
### Modules
  * welite-core - contains the core classes of WeLite
  * welite-javatime - contains column types for LocalDate and LocalDateTime. Requires dependency 
  on ```com.android.tools:desugar_jdk_libs:${Versions.DESUGAR}``` and 
  ```coreLibraryDesugaringEnabled = true``` in compile options
  * app - skeleton application demos configuration, Koin injection, simple database creation, table 
  population, query, etc.

Gradle:
```gradle
implementation("com.ealva:welite-core:0.2.0")
implementation("com.ealva:welite-javatime:0.2.0")
```

Maven:
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.ealva</groupId>
    <artifactId>welite-core</artifactId>
    <version>0.2.0</version>
</dependency>
```
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.ealva</groupId>
    <artifactId>welite-javatime</artifactId>
    <version>0.2.0</version>
</dependency>
```

Ensure you have the most recent version by checking [here][maven-welite-core] and [here][maven-welite-javatime]

For the latest SNAPSHOT check [here][core-snapshot] and [here][javatime-snapshot] 
### Why this library?
For WeLite the desire is to push all SQL down into the library and treat it as an implementation 
detail of interfacing with the persistence layer. Clients should use a Kotlin DSL to describe 
tables and relationships, and then use the resulting objects for CRUD work, keeping SQL and SQLite 
API hidden (objects versus SQL string handling). 

The goal of this library to not to be a full-blown ORM. Instead, this library simplifies reading 
rows and converting them to POJOs efficiently using RDBMS features, primarily supporting simple 
types, and putting few lines of the Relational-OO mapping in the client code (specifying which 
columns are needed to construct a POJO).   

Both the [Squash] and [Exposed] libraries influence this library, primarily the DSL code. 
However, WeLite calls directly into the Android SQLite API and does not go through a JDBC driver, 
which alleviates the need (and code) to deal with variations in SQL and RDBMS features. Also, the 
WeLite design philosophy differs from these other libraries in specific areas. Pre 1.0 versions 
will see significant API changes.       

### The name?
Lite=SQLite and We="without entities". After attempting to port an in-house solution to Room and 
searching for other libraries, it was decided to build a thin wrapper over the SQLite API with a 
Kotlin DSL to build the underlying SQL. The goal is to store and retrieve data with as little 
friction as possible, while providing benefits of a Kotlin interface. That said, the client 
controls what objects are created from rows in a query. While we envision sequences of data classes
or simple types, the user is free to construct any type of object(s).

Why "without entities"? We often find a one-to-many relationship between a row in a table to a 
Kotlin object. So we don't try to enforce a row to entity mapping or load data unnecessarily. A 
higher level layer providing more ORM type functionality could be built over WeLite.  

### TODO
  * Much more testing
  * Expose more SQLite functionality
  * Rethink binding parameters. Currently, not enforcing type at compile-time and instead doing 
  conversions at run-time
  
### Contributions
See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md)

[squash]: https://github.com/orangy/squash
[exposed]: https://github.com/JetBrains/Exposed
[coroutines]: https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coroutines-overview.html
[splitties]: https://github.com/LouisCAD/Splitties
[maven-welite-core]: https://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Cg%3A%22com.ealva%22%20AND%20a%3A%22welite-core%22
[maven-welite-javatime]: https://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Cg%3A%22com.ealva%22%20AND%20a%3A%22welite-javatime%22
[core-snapshot]: https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots/com/ealva/welite-core/
[javatime-snapshot]: https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots/com/ealva/welite-javatime/

Commit message:

Add isActive and ensureActive() to Queryable to facilitate cooperative coroutine cancellation Cleanup logging

README.md, after:


WeLite
======

WeLite is a Kotlin DSL, and Statement/Cursor Wrapper, for Android SQLite 

### The goals of this library are:
  * Provide a DSL for Android SQLite that fully (eventually) encapsulates the underlying SQL
  * Clients write Kotlin - no SQL, no annotation processing
  * Support Kotlin coroutines via suspend methods and an injected coroutine dispatcher
  * Encapsulate SQLite statements, eg. insert/update/delete, for reuse and simplified binding   
  * Encapsulate Select results and provide for easy row->object conversion

## Usage

### WeLite Logging
Logging is done via the [ealvaLog] library. All logging in WeLite uses the Marker defined in the
```WeLiteLog``` object so that all library logging may be filtered in some way (silenced, 
directed to a file, etc). To view query plans and all generated SQL do:
```kotlin
WeLiteLog.logQueryPlans = true
WeLiteLog.logSql = true
```
and refer to the tags:
```kotlin
WeLiteLog.QUERY_PLAN_TAG // Log TAG for logged query SQL and associated query plans
WeLiteLog.LOG_SQL_TAG // Log TAG for all other logged SQL
```
Also, see the ```WeLiteLog``` object for the marker, marker name, marker filter and to configure
WeLite logging.

### Create Database
Create a single Database instance and then inject/locate where needed.
```kotlin
Database(
  context = androidContext(),
  fileName = "FileName",
  tables = listOf(MediaFileTable, ArtistTable, AlbumTable, ArtistAlbumTable),
  version = 1,
  migrations = emptyList(),
  openParams = OpenParams(
    enableWriteAheadLogging = true,
    enableForeignKeyConstraints = true
  )
) {
  onConfigure { configuration -> /* your code */ }
  onCreate { database -> /* your code */ }
  onOpen { database -> /* your code */  }
}
 ``` 
The table list passed to Database will be ordered based on dependencies before being created. 
```Database.tables``` returns the tables in this "dependency" order.

When constructing the Database a DatabaseLifecycle object provides for configuration on 
each step toward fully configured, created, and open. The client optionally provides a lambda to
be called at each step. The interfaces provided to these configuration lambdas are designed based
on when the Android SQLite documentation or code says various functions should be called.     
  
### Define Tables
Tables extend the Table class and define the columns/column attributes.
```kotlin
object MediaFileTable : Table() {
  val id = long("_id") { primaryKey() }
  val mediaUri = text("MediaUri") { unique() }
  val artistId = long("ArtistId") { references(ArtistTable.id) }
  val albumId = long("AlbumId") { references(AlbumTable.id) }
}

object ArtistTable : Table() {
  val id = long("_id") { primaryKey() }
  val comment = optText("comment")
  val artistName = text("ArtistName") { collateNoCase().uniqueIndex() }
}

object AlbumTable : Table() {
  val id = long("_id") { primaryKey() }
  val albumName = text("AlbumName") { collateNoCase().uniqueIndex() }
}

object ArtistAlbumTable : Table() {
  val id = long("_id") { primaryKey() }
  val artistId = long("ArtistId") { index().references(ArtistTable.id, ForeignKeyAction.CASCADE) }
  val albumId = long("AlbumId") { index().references(AlbumTable.id, ForeignKeyAction.CASCADE) }
  init {
    uniqueIndex(artistId, albumId)
  }
}
```   
### Insert Data
To insert data, or any database operation, a transaction needs to be opened. The 
Database.transaction() will execute the given lambda via a CoroutineDispatcher which defaults to 
Dispatchers.IO but may be provided by the client. 
```kotlin
db.transaction {
  // build an insert statement which contains bindable arguments
  val insertStatement = MediaFileTable.insertValues {
    it[mediaUri].bindArg()
    it[fileName].bindArg()
    it[mediaTitle].bindArg()
  }

  // use the insert statement to insert the data, which is most efficient for bulk inserting
  insertStatement.insert {
    it[0] = "file.mpg"
    it[1] = "/dir/Music/file.mpg"
    it[2] = "A Title"
  }

  // reuse statement and insert another row        
  insertStatement.insert {
    it[0] = "/dir/Music/anotherFile.mpg"
    it[1] = "anotherFile.mpg"
    it[2] = "Another Title"
  }

  // example of single insert (statement not exposed)
  MediaFileTable.insert {
    it[mediaUri] = "/dir/Music/third.mp3"
    it[fileName] = "third"
    it[mediaTitle] = "Third Title"
  }

  // single insert with bind variables
  MediaFileTable.insert({ it[0] = "/dir/Music/fourth.mp3" }) {
    it[mediaUri].bindArg()
    it[fileName] = "fourth"
    it[mediaTitle] = "Fourth Title"
  }

  // typically not necessary as the transaction will auto setSuccessful() by default if not
  // rolled back and an exception is not thrown. 
  setSuccessful()
}
```  
### Query Data
Queries are performed on a ColumnSet, such as Table, Join, Alias, or View. The DSL provides for the 
typical select (columns) where (expression) to generate QueryBuilder object on which the client 
can call orderBy, groupBy, etc. and then build or execute the Query.

For example, to get the count of rows in the MediaFileTable where the mediaTitle column has "Hits" 
somewhere in the string:
```kotlin
val count = query {
  MediaFileTable.select(fileName).where { mediaTitle like "%Hits%" }.count()
}
```  
To check if an Artist has been inserted into the ArtistTable, and if not then insert:
```kotlin
query {
  val artist = "The Beatles"
  val idArtist: Long = ArtistTable.select(ArtistTable.id)
        .where { ArtistTable.artistName eq artist }
        .sequence { it[ArtistTable.id] }
        .singleOrNull() ?: ArtistTable.insert { it[artistName] = artist }
}
```
A Select of the artist id on the ArtistTable, where artistName equals the artist in question, is 
performed and is transformed to a sequence where a single item is expected. If the result of 
singleOrNull is null, then the data is inserted.

This snippet from a unit test shows how to refer to a Table alias column via the original table 
column:
```kotlin
query {
  val personAlias = Person.alias("person_alias")
  expect(
    personAlias.select(personAlias[Person.name], personAlias[Person.cityId])
    .where { personAlias[Person.name] eq "Rick"}
    .groupBy(personAlias[Person.cityId])
    .sequence { it[personAlias[Person.name]] }
    .count()
  ).toBe(1)
}
```
### Modules
  * welite-core - contains the core classes of WeLite
  * welite-javatime - contains column types for LocalDate and LocalDateTime. Requires dependency 
  on ```com.android.tools:desugar_jdk_libs:${Versions.DESUGAR}``` and 
  ```coreLibraryDesugaringEnabled = true``` in compile options
  * app - skeleton application demos configuration, Koin injection, simple database creation, table 
  population, query, etc.

Gradle:
```gradle
implementation("com.ealva:welite-core:0.2.0")
implementation("com.ealva:welite-javatime:0.2.0")
```

Maven:
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.ealva</groupId>
    <artifactId>welite-core</artifactId>
    <version>0.2.0</version>
</dependency>
```
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.ealva</groupId>
    <artifactId>welite-javatime</artifactId>
    <version>0.2.0</version>
</dependency>
```

Ensure you have the most recent version by checking [here][maven-welite-core] and [here][maven-welite-javatime]

For the latest SNAPSHOT check [here][core-snapshot] and [here][javatime-snapshot] 
### Why this library?
For WeLite the desire is to push all SQL down into the library and treat it as an implementation 
detail of interfacing with the persistence layer. Clients should use a Kotlin DSL to describe 
tables and relationships, and then use the resulting objects for CRUD work, keeping SQL and SQLite 
API hidden (objects versus SQL string handling). 

The goal of this library to not to be a full-blown ORM. Instead, this library simplifies reading 
rows and converting them to POJOs efficiently using RDBMS features, primarily supporting simple 
types, and putting few lines of the Relational-OO mapping in the client code (specifying which 
columns are needed to construct a POJO).   

Both the [Squash] and [Exposed] libraries influence this library, primarily the DSL code. 
However, WeLite calls directly into the Android SQLite API and does not go through a JDBC driver, 
which alleviates the need (and code) to deal with variations in SQL and RDBMS features. Also, the 
WeLite design philosophy differs from these other libraries in specific areas. Pre 1.0 versions 
will see significant API changes.       

### The name?
Lite=SQLite and We="without entities". After attempting to port an in-house solution to Room and 
searching for other libraries, it was decided to build a thin wrapper over the SQLite API with a 
Kotlin DSL to build the underlying SQL. The goal is to store and retrieve data with as little 
friction as possible, while providing benefits of a Kotlin interface. That said, the client 
controls what objects are created from rows in a query. While we envision sequences of data classes
or simple types, the user is free to construct any type of object(s).

Why "without entities"? We often find a one-to-many relationship between a row in a table to a 
Kotlin object. So we don't try to enforce a row to entity mapping or load data unnecessarily. A 
higher level layer providing more ORM type functionality could be built over WeLite.  

### TODO
  * Much more testing
  * Expose more SQLite functionality
  * Rethink binding parameters. Currently, not enforcing type at compile-time and instead doing 
  conversions at run-time
  
### Contributions
See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md)

[squash]: https://github.com/orangy/squash
[exposed]: https://github.com/JetBrains/Exposed
[coroutines]: https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/coroutines-overview.html
[splitties]: https://github.com/LouisCAD/Splitties
[ealvalog]: https://github.com/ealva-com/ealvalog
[maven-welite-core]: https://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Cg%3A%22com.ealva%22%20AND%20a%3A%22welite-core%22
[maven-welite-javatime]: https://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Cg%3A%22com.ealva%22%20AND%20a%3A%22welite-javatime%22
[core-snapshot]: https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots/com/ealva/welite-core/
[javatime-snapshot]: https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots/com/ealva/welite-javatime/
